One Year of Excalidraw (#372)
excalidraw/excalidraw-blog: content/blog/one-year-of-excalidraw/index.md

- https://web.dev/browser-nativefs/
- https://www.producthunt.com/posts/excalidraw
- React Europe talk https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fix2-SynPGE

- Another book: https://twitter.com/dchest/status/1264237749642637312
- Used to illustrate an O'Reilly Book: https://www.amazon.com/Building-Serverless-Applications-Google-Cloud/dp/1492057096 https://twitter.com/wietsevenema/status/1253752608671621124

## Get involved

Excalidraw wouldn't have become what it is today without all the wonderful contributions. If you haven't already, you can start today! And remember, it's not just code that makes Excalidraw better. Every bit helps, be it bug reports, translations, suggestions for improvements, or just hanging out on our [Discord chat](https://discord.com/invite/UexuTaE).

## What's next

We will continue working hard on improving the performance, adding features where it makes sense, fixing bugs, working with [designers](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/issues/2506) to make Excalidraw look better, and more. But whatever we do, we'll try our best to ensure we don't lose the simplicity and charm that makes Excalidraw the product you love. 💕

## Some cool drawings

> The best part of this project is to see a constant stream of awesome public drawings that people are making with Excalidraw. Here are some of our favorites this year.

Author: ```suggestion
The best part of this project is to see a constant stream of awesome public drawings that people are making with Excalidraw. Here are some of our favorites from 2020.
```

https://twitter.com/addyosmani/status/1241801981955420160

https://twitter.com/levsthings/status/1224104529324412929

https://twitter.com/_RobDominguez/status/1222174661041180673

https://twitter.com/duanebester/status/1220561761964675072

https://twitter.com/abdellah_js/status/1225755552065769472

https://twitter.com/ilyamkin/status/1226609908327514113

https://twitter.com/dai_shi/status/1240494226531479552

https://twitter.com/dai_shi/status/1245273872053579776

https://twitter.com/bartekci/status/1246270772043296768

https://twitter.com/masbagal/status/1247763747755589633

https://twitter.com/Pinnassog/status/1247893044231168001

https://twitter.com/CandideTech/status/1250454449933426688

https://twitter.com/veenusav/status/1251101998184726533

https://twitter.com/jeudesprits/status/1264901836970098689

https://twitter.com/gitpitch/status/1265627223610056707

https://twitter.com/caroso1222/status/1278397651592122371

https://twitter.com/pomber/status/1281339741682753542

https://twitter.com/Vjeux/status/1282909088733511680

https://twitter.com/anas_aito/status/1283487054018600960

https://twitter.com/xnimorz/status/1300065301552390146

> https://twitter.com/patak_js/status/1317097465158553600

Author: ```suggestion
https://twitter.com/patak_js/status/1317097465158553600

https://twitter.com/wietsevenema/status/1343593994895417344

```

In Excalidraw, we use the [browser-nativefs](https://github.com/GoogleChromeLabs/browser-nativefs) library to integrate with the file system of the operating system. This allows us to support a true open→edit→save workflow with proper over-saving and save-as on supported browsers, with a fallback to file uploads and downloads on other browsers. Read more about this feature in [tomayac](https://github.com/tomayac)'s [earlier article](/browser-nativefs/) on this blog. We also have [experimental support](https://web.dev/file-handling/#demo) for file type association, so that when you double-click an `.excalidraw` file in your file explorer, the Excalidraw PWA opens.

### ⚙️ Gatsby plugin

We also have a plugin for Gatsby that automatically converts links to saved Excalidraw drawings to inline SVG at build time. We are actually using it in this post for our charts. Implemented by [trevorblades](https://github.com/trevorblades) & [j-f1](https://github.com/j-f1), and you can find it under [@excalidraw/gatsby-embedder-excalidraw](https://github.com/excalidraw/gatsby-embedder-excalidraw).

https://twitter.com/Vjeux/status/1257906664239333376

### 📦 npm package

> One of the last things we've introduced this year was a completely new npm package, available at [`@excalidraw/excalidraw`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@excalidraw/excalidraw). A long time in the making (thanks to [@aakansha1216](https://twitter.com/aakansha1216) for most of the work), this package allows you to easily embed Excalidraw as a React component into your apps.

Reviewer: this should probably be the last thing as it also says `one of the last things` :)

Author: do it

Reviewer: I don't have access to push to this repo. Could you give me access @lipis?

Author: now you have

Reviewer: Thank you 👍

### 🌒 Dark Mode

https://twitter.com/Msieur_Jo/status/1245288337897914373

### 🏹 Arrow Binding

> 

Reviewer: some lines and credits to author for this and dark mode ?

https://twitter.com/excalidraw/status/1292403762427039744

## Excalidraw in the news

- https://pakstech.com/blog/draw-diagrams/
- https://dev.to/ndsn/why-excalidraw-is-mightier-than-the-pen-and-the-sword-329f
- https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=23525648
- https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=22663435
- https://web.dev/browser-nativefs/
- https://www.producthunt.com/posts/excalidraw
- React Europe talk https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fix2-SynPGE

- Another book: https://twitter.com/dchest/status/1264237749642637312
- Used to illustrate an O'Reilly Book: https://www.amazon.com/Building-Serverless-Applications-Google-Cloud/dp/1492057096 https://twitter.com/wietsevenema/status/1253752608671621124

## Get involved

> Excalidraw wouldn't have become what it is today without all the wonderful contributions. If you haven't already, you can start today! And remember, it's not just code that makes Excalidraw better. Every bit helps, be it bug reports, translations, suggestions for improvements, or just hanging out on our [Discord chat](https://discord.com/invite/UexuTaE).

Reviewer: should we a link to [good first issues](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22good+first+issue%22) ?

Reviewer: probably we should mention here to join follow the twitter account as the header says `Get involved`

Author: ```suggestion
Excalidraw wouldn't have become what it is today without all the wonderful contributions. If you haven't already, you can start today! And remember, it's not just code that makes Excalidraw better. Every bit helps, be it bug reports, translations, suggestions for improvements, or just hanging out on our [Discord chat](https://discord.com/invite/UexuTaE). Also don't forget to follow us on Twitter [@excalidraw](https://twitter.com/excalidraw) for all the latest news and announcements.
```

---
title: One Year of Excalidraw
date: 2021-01-01
author: Excalidraw Team
link: https://github.com/orgs/excalidraw/people
image: og.png
---

> It's been kind of a different year, but it was the first year and pretty amazing for [Excalidraw](https://excalidraw.com).

<!-- end -->

Excalidraw started as a way to procrastinate on January 1st, 2020, and ended up being a fully fledged whiteboard product only one year later! In this post, we'll go over the most important features that made Excalidraw great at being a virtual whiteboard for sketching hand-drawn like diagrams.

We are so incredibly proud to have built something that is being used by **20k weekly active people**.

https://excalidraw.com/#json=6443031091740672,amxJZJxlZAlUBLADWIukFg

## Tech Stack

> Excalidraw is fully open source, but it also stands on the shoulders of many other projects. We couldn't do it without [Rough.js](https://github.com/rough-stuff/rough), the library that gives Excalidraw its unique look, FG_Virgil the hand-written font designed by [Ellinor Rapp](https://www.myfonts.com/newsletters/cc/200712.html) and [React](https://github.com/facebook/react), of course. [TypeScript](https://github.com/microsoft/TypeScript) is also essential to tame the complexity of our codebase, giving a helping hand to new contributors (and old ones alike). Our full list of [dependencies](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/network/dependencies) is listed on GitHub.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Excalidraw is fully open source, but it also stands on the shoulders of many other projects. We couldn't do it without [Rough.js](https://github.com/rough-stuff/rough), the library that gives Excalidraw its unique look; FG_Virgil, the hand-written font designed by [Ellinor Rapp](https://www.myfonts.com/newsletters/cc/200712.html); [TypeScript](https://github.com/microsoft/TypeScript), to tame the complexity of our codebase, giving a helping hand to new contributors (and old ones alike); and last but not least, [React](https://github.com/facebook/react). Our full list of [dependencies](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/network/dependencies) is listed on GitHub.
```

Reintroducing the comma before `and` which is significant here, without which it adds ambiguity — did React team contribute to the Virgil font? 

Also added comma after `FG_Virgil`.

I agree it's a bit too over-commatized here, so changed the sentences a bit, and turned commas that separate each project into semicolons.

> In addition, Excalidraw was made possible thanks to awesome services such as [Vercel](https://vercel.com/) for hosting and pull request previews, [Crowdin](https://crowdin.com/project/excalidraw) for managing dozens of translations, [CodeSandbox](https://codesandbox.io/) for easy hacking on the project, [Sentry](https://sentry.io/) for error reporting, and [Dependabot](https://github.blog/2020-06-01-keep-all-your-packages-up-to-date-with-dependabot/) to keep our dependencies up to date.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition, Excalidraw is depending on many awesome services such as [Vercel](https://vercel.com/) for hosting and pull request previews, [Crowdin](https://crowdin.com/project/excalidraw) for managing dozens of translations, [CodeSandbox](https://codesandbox.io/) for easy hacking on the project, [Sentry](https://sentry.io/) for error reporting, and [Dependabot](https://github.blog/2020-06-01-keep-all-your-packages-up-to-date-with-dependabot/) to keep our dependencies up to date.
```

We have too many "couldn't be possible"/"was possible"/"couldn't do it" in these 3 paragraphs.

> Finally, this success couldn't have been possible without to the over [100 contributors](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/graphs/contributors) that helped us ship new features, improvements, and fixes right to production.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, this success wouldn't be possible without you, the over [100 contributors](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/graphs/contributors) who helped us ship new features, improvements, and fixes right to production.
```

https://excalidraw.com/#json=6671570797854720,bqkIFBlioHfMMLYHtcdGjA

## Some of our coolest features

### 🤝 Collaboration

> When the lockdown started, companies all around the world struggled to adapt to remote work. [idlewinn](https://github.com/idlewinn) and [petehunt](https://github.com/petehunt) [implemented live collaboration](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/879) to enable it to be used for interviews, brainstorming, presentations, and more. If you're curious, we [explained how it works in a blog post](/building-excalidraw-p2p-collaboration-feature/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the lockdown started, companies all around the world struggled to adapt to remote work. [idlewinn](https://github.com/idlewinn) and [petehunt](https://github.com/petehunt) [implemented live collaboration](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/879) that could be used for interviews, brainstorming, presentations, and more. If you're curious, we [explained how it works in a blog post](/building-excalidraw-p2p-collaboration-feature/).
```

simplify

https://twitter.com/Vjeux/status/1238907727906127872

### 🔒 Your data is encrypted

Many of Excalidraw use cases involve drawing sensitive data. As such, we architected our system so that our servers never see the content of your drawings, using end-to-end encryption. The [backend](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw-json) support for storing data was implemented by [lipis](https://github.com/lipis), while the [client-side encryption itself](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/642) was added by [vjeux](https://github.com/vjeux). Read how we are doing it in our article on [end-to-end encryption](/end-to-end-encryption/).

https://excalidraw.com/#json=5645858175451136,8w-G0ZXiOfRYAn7VWpANxw

### 🇺🇳 Translations

> It was important for us early on to make sure that Excalidraw was translated into many languages so that it could be used all over the world. The [initial implementation](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/638) was done by [fernandoalava](https://github.com/fernandoalava), while the automatic integration with our [Crowdin project](https://crowdin.com/project/excalidraw) was set up by [lipis](https://github.com/lipis). Support for right-to-left languages was [implemented](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1154) soon after by [j-f1](https://github.com/j-f1). To top it off, [Ellinor Rapp](https://www.myfonts.com/newsletters/cc/200712.html) designed new glyphs for several non-latin languages and added them to the Virgil hand-written font we're using. You can read more [about how we manage translations on the blog](/enabling-translations/)!!.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It was important for us early on to make sure that Excalidraw was translated into many languages so that it could be used all over the world. The [initial implementation](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/638) was done by [fernandoalava](https://github.com/fernandoalava), while the automatic integration with our [Crowdin project](https://crowdin.com/project/excalidraw) was set up by [lipis](https://github.com/lipis). Support for right-to-left languages was [implemented](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1154) soon after by [j-f1](https://github.com/j-f1). To top it off, [Ellinor Rapp](https://www.myfonts.com/newsletters/cc/200712.html) designed new glyphs for several non-latin languages. You can read more [about how we manage translations on the blog](/enabling-translations/)!
```

Since we've already introduced the font few paragraphs above, I removed the duplicate "introduction".

### 📱 Mobile first

> Touch support and mobile-optimized layout [were](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/787) [first](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/788) [added](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/790) by [j-f1](https://github.com/j-f1). This includes the creation of a toolbar for mobile devices that displays relevant controls while still leaving most of the screen free for the canvas.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Touch support and mobile-optimized layout [was](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/787) [first](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/788) [added](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/790) by [j-f1](https://github.com/j-f1). This includes the creation of a toolbar for mobile devices that displays relevant controls while still leaving most of the screen free for the canvas.
```

I know `were` is (also) grammatically correct, but it just doesn't roll of my tongue. Feel free to reject this if you feel it's fine.

### 📚 Library

> The library was [first implemented](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1787) by [petehunt](https://github.com/petehunt). Later, after adding support for exporting the library to a file, we eventually introduced a public directory for libraries. Visit [libraries.excalidraw.com](https://libraries.excalidraw.com) for more.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The library was [first implemented](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1787) by [petehunt](https://github.com/petehunt). After adding support for exporting/importing the library, we eventually introduced a public directory where you can share yours. Visit [libraries.excalidraw.com](https://libraries.excalidraw.com) for more.
```

https://twitter.com/dbs_sticky/status/1340349749086580736

### 📊 Excalicharts

While we aim to keep Excalidraw simple to use, sometimes we hide little easter eggs that you need to find out for yourself (or find some hints by following our [Twitter account](https://twitter.com/excalidraw)). For example, you can copy any two-column dataset from a spreadsheet, or comma separated values (CSV) from a text file, and paste them into Excalidraw to quickly produce a chart. The [first implementation](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1723) was done by [petehunt](https://github.com/petehunt) and several [improvements](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/2495) were made by [lipis](https://github.com/lipis).

> ### ✍️ Free Draw mode
> 
> The [free hand draw](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1570) was one of the most [requested](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/issues/25) features. Thanks to [kbariotis](https://github.com/kbariotis) for implementing this.
> 
> https://twitter.com/excalidraw/status/1260287781596794880

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### 🏹 Lines and Arrows

Possibly the single most complex feature in Excalidraw, lines/arrows have come a long way since the beginning. Initially, we've only had two-point lines. Multi-point support was added by [gasimgasimzada](https://github.com/GasimGasimzada), with improvements (such as rotation) by [dai-shi](https://github.com/dai-shi), line editing by [dwelle](https://github.com/dwelle), and by popular demand the arrow binding by [xixixao](https://github.com/xixixao).

https://twitter.com/excalidraw/status/1292403762427039744

Related, the [free hand drawing](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1570), one of the most [requested](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/issues/25) features, was implemented by [kbariotis](https://github.com/kbariotis).

https://twitter.com/excalidraw/status/1260287781596794880
```

### #️⃣ Grid and Stats

> From early on people were asking for more precision in their hand drawn diagrams. We complied by adding the [grid support](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1788) implemented by [dai-chi](https://github.com/dai-shi) and—inspired by _YouTube's stats for nerds_—our own version of [stats](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/2453) implemented by [lipis](https://github.com/lipis). Both features could be found under the context menu from the canvas.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
From early on, people were asking for more precision in their hand drawn diagrams. We complied by adding the [grid support](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1788) implemented by [dai-shi](https://github.com/dai-shi), and—inspired by _YouTube's stats for nerds_—our own version of [stats](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/2453) implemented by [lipis](https://github.com/lipis). Both features could be found under the context menu by right-clicking on the canvas.
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From early on people were asking for more precision in their hand-drawn diagrams. We complied by adding the [grid support](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1788) implemented by [dai-chi](https://github.com/dai-shi) and—inspired by _YouTube's stats for nerds_—our own version of [stats](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/2453) implemented by [lipis](https://github.com/lipis). Both features could be found under the context menu from the canvas.

https://twitter.com/excalidraw/status/1275451062414045190
https://twitter.com/excalidraw/status/1335988128608301063
```
Since these features are hidden behind the context menu we might want to embed twitter links

### 💾 File system integration and file handling

In Excalidraw, we use the [browser-nativefs](https://github.com/GoogleChromeLabs/browser-nativefs) library to integrate with the file system of the operating system. This allows us to support a true open→edit→save workflow with proper over-saving and save-as on supported browsers, with a fallback to file uploads and downloads on other browsers. Read more about this feature in [tomayac](https://github.com/tomayac)'s [earlier article](/browser-nativefs/) on this blog. We also have [experimental support](https://web.dev/file-handling/#demo) for file type association, so that when you double-click an `.excalidraw` file in your file explorer, the Excalidraw PWA opens.

### ⚙️ Gatsby plugin

> We also have a plugin for Gatsby that automatically converts links to saved Excalidraw drawings to inline SVG at build time. We are actually using it in this post for our charts. Implemented by [trevorblades](https://github.com/trevorblades) & [j-f1](https://github.com/j-f1), and you can find it under [@excalidraw/gatsby-embedder-excalidraw](https://github.com/excalidraw/gatsby-embedder-excalidraw).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We also have a plugin for Gatsby that automatically converts links to saved Excalidraw drawings to inline SVG at build time. We are actually using it in this post for our charts. Implemented by [trevorblades](https://github.com/trevorblades) and [j-f1](https://github.com/j-f1). You can find it under [@excalidraw/gatsby-embedder-excalidraw](https://github.com/excalidraw/gatsby-embedder-excalidraw).
```

https://twitter.com/Vjeux/status/1257906664239333376

### 🌒 Dark Mode

> We also launched virtual blackboard. Thanks to [@xixixao](https://twitter.com/xixixao) for building this. https://twitter.com/Msieur_Jo/status/1245288337897914373

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To help protect your eyes, [@xixixao](https://twitter.com/xixixao) added dark mode, effectively turning Excalidraw into an actual blackboard. https://twitter.com/Msieur_Jo/status/1245288337897914373
```

A "virtual blackboard" could have been confusing.

> ### 🏹 Arrow Binding
> 
> This was also one of the most awaited features. Thanks to [@xixixao](https://twitter.com/xixixao) for building this. https://twitter.com/excalidraw/status/1292403762427039744

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Removed coz I merged this into lines/arrows above.

> 
> ### 🏹 Arrow Binding
> 
> This was also one of the most awaited features. Thanks to [@xixixao](https://twitter.com/xixixao) for building this. https://twitter.com/excalidraw/status/1292403762427039744

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Removed coz I merged this into lines/arrows above.

## Excalidraw in the news

- Featured twice on Hacker News:
  - https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=23525648
  - https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=22663435
- As an example on **web.dev** article: https://web.dev/browser-nativefs/
- A few blog posts:
  - https://pakstech.com/blog/draw-diagrams/
  - https://dev.to/ndsn/why-excalidraw-is-mightier-than-the-pen-and-the-sword-329f
- On Product Hunt: https://www.producthunt.com/posts/excalidraw
- React Europe talk: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fix2-SynPGE
- Used to illustrate an O'Reilly Book: https://www.amazon.com/dp/1492057096
- Another book: https://twitter.com/dchest/status/1264237749642637312
- Few companies also integrated Excalidraw in the product
  - [HackerRank](https://blog.hackerrank.com/virtual-whiteboarding-for-system-design-interviews/)
  - [Lobelia Earth](https://twitter.com/lobeliaearth/status/1275073557484244992)

> https://twitter.com/wietsevenema/status/1253752608671621124

Reviewer: shouldn't this be part of drawings ?

Reviewer 2: it should be under the O'Reilly Book. I'll put it there.

> - Used to illustrate an O'Reilly Book: https://www.amazon.com/dp/1492057096
> - Another book: https://twitter.com/dchest/status/1264237749642637312
> - Few companies also integrated Excalidraw in the product
>   - [HackerRank](https://blog.hackerrank.com/virtual-whiteboarding-for-system-design-interviews/)
>   - [Lobelia Earth](https://twitter.com/lobeliaearth/status/1275073557484244992)
> 
> https://twitter.com/wietsevenema/status/1253752608671621124

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Used to illustrate an O'Reilly Book: https://www.amazon.com/dp/1492057096

    https://twitter.com/wietsevenema/status/1253752608671621124
- Another book: https://twitter.com/dchest/status/1264237749642637312
- Few companies also integrated Excalidraw in the product
  - [HackerRank](https://blog.hackerrank.com/virtual-whiteboarding-for-system-design-interviews/)
  - [Lobelia Earth](https://twitter.com/lobeliaearth/status/1275073557484244992)
```

Reviewer 2: move tweet under the bullet point it belongs to

## Get involved

> Excalidraw wouldn't have become what it is today without all the wonderful contributions. If you haven't already, you can start today! And remember, it's not just code that makes Excalidraw better. Every bit helps, be it bug reports, translations, suggestions for improvements, or just hanging out on our [Discord chat](https://discord.com/invite/UexuTaE). Also don't forget to follow us on Twitter [@excalidraw](https://twitter.com/excalidraw) for all the latest news and announcements.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Excalidraw wouldn't have become what it is today without all the wonderful contributions. If you haven't already, you can start today! And remember, it's not just code that makes Excalidraw better. Every bit helps, be it bug reports, translations, suggestions for improvements, or just hanging out on our [Discord chat](https://discord.com/invite/UexuTaE). Don't forget to follow us on Twitter [@excalidraw](https://twitter.com/excalidraw) for all the latest news and announcements.
```

### 📚 Library

The library was [first implemented](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1787) by [petehunt](https://github.com/petehunt). After adding support for exporting/importing the library, we eventually introduced a public directory where you can share yours. Visit [libraries.excalidraw.com](https://libraries.excalidraw.com) for more.

https://twitter.com/dbs_sticky/status/1340349749086580736

### 📊 Excalicharts

While we aim to keep Excalidraw simple to use, sometimes we hide little easter eggs that you need to find out for yourself (or find some hints by following our [Twitter account](https://twitter.com/excalidraw)). For example, you can copy any two-column dataset from a spreadsheet, or comma separated values (CSV) from a text file, and paste them into Excalidraw to quickly produce a chart. The [first implementation](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1723) was done by [petehunt](https://github.com/petehunt) and several [improvements](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/2495) were made by [lipis](https://github.com/lipis).

### 🏹 Lines and Arrows

> Possibly the single most complex feature in Excalidraw, lines/arrows have come a long way since the beginning. Initially, we've only had two-point lines. Multi-point support was added by [gasimgasimzada](https://github.com/GasimGasimzada), with improvements (such as rotation) by [dai-shi](https://github.com/dai-shi), line editing by [dwelle](https://github.com/dwelle), and by popular demand the arrow binding by [xixixao](https://github.com/xixixao).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Possibly the single most complex feature in Excalidraw, lines/arrows have come a long way since the beginning. Initially, we've only had two-point lines. Multi-point support was added by [gasimgasimzada](https://github.com/GasimGasimzada), with improvements by [dai-shi](https://github.com/dai-shi), line editing by [dwelle](https://github.com/dwelle), and by popular demand the arrow binding by [xixixao](https://github.com/xixixao).
```

https://twitter.com/excalidraw/status/1292403762427039744

Related, the [free hand drawing](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1570), one of the most [requested](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/issues/25) features, was implemented by [kbariotis](https://github.com/kbariotis).

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

# 🔄 More powerful editing

We must give a shout-out to [dai-shi](https://github.com/dai-shi) for continuous implementations of seemingly simple, but in fact pretty hard problems such as rotation and resizing, especially in combination of editing multiple elements at once.

https://twitter.com/dai_shi/status/1245273872053579776
```

## Some cool drawings

The best part of this project is to see a constant stream of awesome public drawings that people are making with Excalidraw. Here are some of our favorites from 2020.

https://twitter.com/LeaVerou/status/1306001020636540934

https://twitter.com/_cloudmu/status/1318288738422824962

https://twitter.com/elijahmanor/status/1287734485987950592

https://twitter.com/_JessicaSachs/status/1337555805609013248

https://twitter.com/aqandrew/status/1289275670871252995

https://twitter.com/Clainchoupi/status/1321200109707808769

https://twitter.com/addyosmani/status/1241801981955420160

https://twitter.com/levsthings/status/1224104529324412929

https://twitter.com/_RobDominguez/status/1222174661041180673

https://twitter.com/duanebester/status/1220561761964675072

https://twitter.com/abdellah_js/status/1225755552065769472

https://twitter.com/ilyamkin/status/1226609908327514113

https://twitter.com/dai_shi/status/1240494226531479552

> https://twitter.com/dai_shi/status/1245273872053579776
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
https://twitter.com/dai_shi/status/1245273872053579776

```

### 🏹 Lines and Arrows

Possibly the single most complex feature in Excalidraw, lines/arrows have come a long way since the beginning. Initially, we've only had two-point lines. Multi-point support was added by [gasimgasimzada](https://github.com/GasimGasimzada), with improvements by [dai-shi](https://github.com/dai-shi), line editing by [dwelle](https://github.com/dwelle), and by popular demand the arrow binding by [xixixao](https://github.com/xixixao).

https://twitter.com/excalidraw/status/1292403762427039744

Related, the [free hand drawing](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1570), one of the most [requested](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/issues/25) features, was implemented by [kbariotis](https://github.com/kbariotis).

> # 🔄 More powerful editing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### 🔄 More powerful editing
```

> Related, the [free hand drawing](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1570), one of the most [requested](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/issues/25) features, was implemented by [kbariotis](https://github.com/kbariotis).
> 
> ### 🔄 More powerful editing
> 
> We must give a shout-out to [dai-shi](https://github.com/dai-shi) for continuous implementations of seemingly simple, but in fact pretty hard problems such as rotation and resizing, especially in combination of editing multiple elements at once.
> 
> https://twitter.com/dai_shi/status/1245273872053579776
> https://twitter.com/excalidraw/status/1260287781596794880

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Related, the [free hand drawing](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1570), one of the most [requested](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/issues/25) features, was implemented by [kbariotis](https://github.com/kbariotis).

https://twitter.com/excalidraw/status/1260287781596794880

### 🔄 More powerful editing

We must give a shout-out to [dai-shi](https://github.com/dai-shi) for continuous implementations of seemingly simple, but in fact pretty hard problems such as rotation and resizing, especially in combination of editing multiple elements at once.

https://twitter.com/dai_shi/status/1245273872053579776
```

### 📚 Library

The library was [first implemented](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1787) by [petehunt](https://github.com/petehunt). After adding support for exporting/importing the library, we eventually introduced a public directory where you can share yours. Visit [libraries.excalidraw.com](https://libraries.excalidraw.com) for more.

https://twitter.com/dbs_sticky/status/1340349749086580736

### 📊 Excalicharts

While we aim to keep Excalidraw simple to use, sometimes we hide little easter eggs that you need to find out for yourself (or find some hints by following our [Twitter account](https://twitter.com/excalidraw)). For example, you can copy any two-column dataset from a spreadsheet, or comma separated values (CSV) from a text file, and paste them into Excalidraw to quickly produce a chart. The [first implementation](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1723) was done by [petehunt](https://github.com/petehunt) and several [improvements](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/2495) were made by [lipis](https://github.com/lipis).

### 🏹 Lines and Arrows

> Possibly the single most complex feature in Excalidraw, lines/arrows have come a long way since the beginning. Initially, we've only had two-point lines. Multi-point support was added by [gasimgasimzada](https://github.com/GasimGasimzada), with improvements by [dai-shi](https://github.com/dai-shi), line editing by [dwelle](https://github.com/dwelle), and by popular demand the arrow binding by [xixixao](https://github.com/xixixao).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Possibly the single most complex feature in Excalidraw, lines/arrows have come a long way since the beginning. Initially, we've only had two-point lines. Multi-point support was added by [gasimgasimzada](https://github.com/GasimGasimzada), with improvements by [dai-shi](https://github.com/dai-shi), line editing by [dwelle](https://github.com/dwelle), arrowheads by [steveruizok](https://github.com/steveruizok), and by popular demand the arrow binding by [xixixao](https://github.com/xixixao).
```

---
title: One Year of Excalidraw
date: 2020-12-25
author: Excalidraw Team
link: https://github.com/orgs/excalidraw/people
---

> It's been kind of a different year, but it was the first year and pretty amazing for [Excalidraw](https://excalidraw.com).

<!-- end -->

Some words from the big boss [@vjeux](https://twitter.com/vjeux)

> Bla bla bla

## Let's start with some numbers

> It's been a nice and steady growth, given that our only marketing is Twitter, and of course all the love that we are receiving over there. We are reaching around **60K vistis** per month and the grand total of the visits in our first year is well over **500K**!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It's been a nice and steady growth, given that our only marketing is Twitter, and of course all the love that we are receiving over there. We are reaching around **60K visits** per month and the grand total of the visits in our first year is well over **500K**!
```

> ### Visists

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Visits
```

![Weekly visists](ga-users.png)

### Commits

> We have well over [100 contributors](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/graphs/contributors) to the project and we have almost daily incremental improvments and deployments to production. Everything is updated frequntly and automatically with tools like [Vercel](https://vercel.com/), [Dependabot](https://github.blog/2020-06-01-keep-all-your-packages-up-to-date-with-dependabot/), [Crowdin](https://crowdin.com/project/excalidraw), and others.

Reviewer 4: Typos: `improvments`, `frequntly`

> We have well over [100 contributors](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/graphs/contributors) to the project and we have almost daily incremental improvments and deployments to production. Everything is updated frequntly and automatically with tools like [Vercel](https://vercel.com/), [Dependabot](https://github.blog/2020-06-01-keep-all-your-packages-up-to-date-with-dependabot/), [Crowdin](https://crowdin.com/project/excalidraw), and others.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We have over [100 contributors](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/graphs/contributors) that help us ship almost daily fixes, improvements, and new features right to production. Using tools and services like [Vercel](https://vercel.com/), [Dependabot](https://github.blog/2020-06-01-keep-all-your-packages-up-to-date-with-dependabot/), [Crowdin](https://crowdin.com/project/excalidraw), and others, we can to smooth this process out, or completely automate it.
```

Fixed the typos, removed repetition ("well over"), tweaked some sentences. Subjective of course, feel free to pick & choose.

https://excalidraw.com/#json=5581555745423360,ey-JjKwlVeZcWNtx_m823A

## Our basic tech stack

> Excalidraw is fully open sourced and we rely on many other open source projects. We couldn't do it without [Rough.js](https://github.com/rough-stuff/rough) of course and our main stack among other things is [React](https://github.com/facebook/react) and [TypeScript](https://github.com/microsoft/TypeScript). Our full list of [dependencies](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/network/dependencies) is listed on GitHub and we are using Dependabot to keep them all up to date.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Excalidraw is fully open source, but it also stands on the shoulders of many other open source projects. We couldn't do it without [Rough.js](https://github.com/rough-stuff/rough), the library that gives Excalidraw its unique look, and [React](https://github.com/facebook/react), of course. [TypeScript](https://github.com/microsoft/TypeScript) is also essential to tame the complexity of our codebase, giving a helping to hand to new contributors (and old ones alike), and reducing the need to write as many tests. Our full list of [dependencies](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/network/dependencies) is listed on GitHub and we are thankful to Dependabot to keep them all up to date.
```

## Some of our features

### 🤝 Collaboration

> Collaborating with multiple users was [first implemented](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/879) by [idlewinn](https://github.com/idlewinn) and improved gradually. It's end to end encrypted, so you can be safe that your drawings are not seen by anyone that you don't want to.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Collaborating with multiple users was [first implemented](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/879) by [idlewinn](https://github.com/idlewinn) and improved gradually from them on. It's end to end encrypted which means that not only our servers can't read the contents, but if it ever happens to fall into someone else's hands they won't be able to read it either.
```

### 🔒 Your data is encrypted

> The [backend](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw-json) support for storing data was implemted by [lipis](https://github.com/lipis) and the client [support for encrypting](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/642) the data before submiting was done by [vjeux](https://github.com/vjeux). Read more on how we are doing it in [end to end encryption](/end-to-end-encryption/) article.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [backend](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw-json) support for storing data was implemented by [lipis](https://github.com/lipis) and the client [support for encrypting](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/642) the data before submitting was done by [vjeux](https://github.com/vjeux). Read more on how we are doing it in [end to end encryption](/end-to-end-encryption/) article.
```

### 📚 Library

> The library was [first introduced](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1787) by [petehunt](https://github.com/petehunt). Later after adding support for saving the library as a file, we eventually have a public directory for libraries. Visit [libraries.excalidraw.com](https://libraries.excalidraw.com) for more.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The library was [first implemented](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1787) by [petehunt](https://github.com/petehunt). Later after adding support for saving the library as a file, we eventually introduced a public directory for libraries. Visit [libraries.excalidraw.com](https://libraries.excalidraw.com) for more.
```

### 📊 Excalicharts

> Copy any two columns data from Excel, Spreadsheet or comma separated values (CSV) from a text file and paste them into Excalidraw. The [first implementation](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1723) was done by [petehunt](https://github.com/petehunt) and the [improvements](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/2495) by [lipis](https://github.com/lipis).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While we aim to keep Excalidraw simple to use, sometimes we hide little easter eggs that you need to find out for yourself (or follow our [Twitter account](https://twitter.com/excalidraw)). For example, you can copy any two column-tabulated data from Excel, Spreadsheets, or comma separated values (CSV) from a text file and paste them into Excalidraw to get a nice graph out of it. The [first implementation](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1723) was done by [petehunt](https://github.com/petehunt) and the [improvements](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/2495) by [lipis](https://github.com/lipis).
```

> While we aim to keep Excalidraw simple to use, sometimes we hide little easter eggs that you need to find out for yourself (or follow our [Twitter account](https://twitter.com/excalidraw)). For example, you can copy any two column-tabulated data from Excel, Spreadsheets, or comma separated values (CSV) from a text file and paste them into Excalidraw to get a nice chart out of it. The [first implementation](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1723) was done by [petehunt](https://github.com/petehunt) and the [improvements](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/2495) by [lipis](https://github.com/lipis).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While we aim to keep Excalidraw simple to use, sometimes we hide little easter eggs that you need to find out for yourself (or follow our [Twitter account](https://twitter.com/excalidraw)). For example, you can copy any two column data from Excel, Spreadsheets, or comma separated values (CSV) from a text file and paste them into Excalidraw to get a nice chart out of it. The [first implementation](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1723) was done by [petehunt](https://github.com/petehunt) and the [improvements](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/2495) by [lipis](https://github.com/lipis).
```

Actually, dunno what "column-tabulated" means. Must have been tired yesterday evening :).

### ✍️ Free Draw mode

The [free hand draw](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1570) was added by [kbariotis](https://github.com/kbariotis).

### 🏳 Translations

From early on, users were asking for supporting multiple languages. The [final implementation](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/638) of it was done by [vjeux](https://github.com/vjeux) and the automatic integration with our [Crowdin](https://crowdin.com/project/excalidraw) project was done by [lipis](https://github.com/lipis).

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

### 💾 File system integration and file handling

In Excalidraw, we use the [browser-nativefs](https://github.com/GoogleChromeLabs/browser-nativefs) library
to integrate with the file system of the operating system. This allows us to support a true open→edit→save
workflow with proper over-saving and save-as on supporting browsers, and a fallback to downloading files
and file uploads on other browsers. Read more about this feature in [tomayac](https://github.com/tomayac)'s
[article](https://blog.excalidraw.com/browser-nativefs/). We also have
[experimental support](https://web.dev/file-handling/#demo) for file type
association, so that when you double-click an `.excalidraw` file in your file explorer, the Excalidraw PWA opens.
```

### 💾 File system integration and file handling

In Excalidraw, we use the [browser-nativefs](https://github.com/GoogleChromeLabs/browser-nativefs) library to integrate with the file system of the operating system. This allows us to support a true open→edit→save workflow with proper over-saving and save-as on supporting browsers, and a fallback to downloading files and file uploads on other browsers. Read more about this feature in [tomayac](https://github.com/tomayac)'s [article](/browser-nativefs/). We also have [experimental support](https://web.dev/file-handling/#demo) for file type association, so that when you double-click an `.excalidraw` file in your file explorer, the Excalidraw PWA opens.

### ⚙️ Gatsby plugin

A plugin for Gatsby where you can very easily insert Excalidraw links and it will convert it to SVG during build time. We are actually using it in this post for our charts. Implemented by [trevorblades](https://github.com/trevorblades) and you can find it under [@excalidraw/gatsby-embedder-excalidraw](https://github.com/excalidraw/gatsby-embedder-excalidraw).

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

# NPM package

One of the last things we've introduced this year was the completely rewritten npm package, available at [`@excalidraw/excalidraw`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@excalidraw/excalidraw). Long time in the making (thanks to [@aakansha1216](https://twitter.com/aakansha1216) for most of the work), this package allows you to easily embed Excalidraw as a React component into your apps. We're nearing a 1.0.0 release, and will continue to actively develop it alongside our web app, so be sure to check it out and report any issues or requests to our [GitHub issue tracker](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/issues).

(As you may have noticed, the package is under [`@excalidraw`](https://www.npmjs.com/search?q=%40excalidraw) namespace under which we plan to also publish related packages. One of them is [`@excalidraw/utils`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@excalidraw/utils).
```

Author: `#` is `H1` and we should have only one on the page.. but why not as part of the features?

Reviewer 2: A mistake, it should be, of course.

---
title: One Year of Excalidraw
date: 2020-12-25
author: Excalidraw Team
link: https://github.com/orgs/excalidraw/people
---

> It's been kind of a different year, but it was the first year and pretty amazing for [Excalidraw](https://excalidraw.com).

<!-- end -->

Some words from the big boss [@vjeux](https://twitter.com/vjeux)

> Bla bla bla

## Let's start with some numbers

It's been a nice and steady growth, given that our only marketing is Twitter, and of course all the love that we are receiving over there. We are reaching around **60K visits** per month and the grand total of the visits in our first year is well over **500K**!

### Visits

![Weekly visists](ga-users.png)

### Commits

We have over [100 contributors](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/graphs/contributors) that help us ship almost daily fixes, improvements, and new features right to production. Using tools and services like [Vercel](https://vercel.com/), [Dependabot](https://github.blog/2020-06-01-keep-all-your-packages-up-to-date-with-dependabot/), [Crowdin](https://crowdin.com/project/excalidraw) we can smooth this process out, or even completely automate it.

> https://excalidraw.com/#json=5581555745423360,ey-JjKwlVeZcWNtx_m823A

Author: ```suggestion
https://excalidraw.com/#json=5035223658004480,t4Y53hm-6O1PgeUVwG_GMQ
```

### 📚 Library

The library was [first implemented](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1787) by [petehunt](https://github.com/petehunt). Later after adding support for saving the library as a file, we eventually introduced a public directory for libraries. Visit [libraries.excalidraw.com](https://libraries.excalidraw.com) for more.

### 📊 Excalicharts

While we aim to keep Excalidraw simple to use, sometimes we hide little easter eggs that you need to find out for yourself (or follow our [Twitter account](https://twitter.com/excalidraw)). For example, you can copy any two column data from Excel, Spreadsheets, or comma separated values (CSV) from a text file and paste them into Excalidraw to get a nice chart out of it. The [first implementation](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1723) was done by [petehunt](https://github.com/petehunt) and the [improvements](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/2495) by [lipis](https://github.com/lipis).

### ✍️ Free Draw mode

The [free hand draw](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1570) was added by [kbariotis](https://github.com/kbariotis).

> ### 🏳 Translations
> 
> From early on, users were asking for supporting multiple languages. The [final implementation](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/638) of it was done by [vjeux](https://github.com/vjeux) and the automatic integration with our [Crowdin](https://crowdin.com/project/excalidraw) project was done by [lipis](https://github.com/lipis).

Reviewer 5: The white flag has a [negative connotation](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/white_flag) of “surrender,” and the UN flag more explicitly represents “global” to me. Another great alternative is 🌐.

```suggestion
### 🇺🇳 Translations

From early on, users were asking for supporting multiple languages. The [final implementation](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/638) of it was done by [vjeux](https://github.com/vjeux) and the automatic integration with our [Crowdin](https://crowdin.com/project/excalidraw) project was done by [lipis](https://github.com/lipis). UI support for right-to-left languages was [implemented](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1154) by [j-f1](https://github.com/j-f1).
```

### 💾 File system integration and file handling

In Excalidraw, we use the [browser-nativefs](https://github.com/GoogleChromeLabs/browser-nativefs) library to integrate with the file system of the operating system. This allows us to support a true open→edit→save workflow with proper over-saving and save-as on supporting browsers, and a fallback to downloading files and file uploads on other browsers. Read more about this feature in [tomayac](https://github.com/tomayac)'s [article](/browser-nativefs/). We also have [experimental support](https://web.dev/file-handling/#demo) for file type association, so that when you double-click an `.excalidraw` file in your file explorer, the Excalidraw PWA opens.

### ⚙️ Gatsby plugin

> A plugin for Gatsby where you can very easily insert Excalidraw links and it will convert it to SVG during build time. We are actually using it in this post for our charts. Implemented by [trevorblades](https://github.com/trevorblades) and you can find it under [@excalidraw/gatsby-embedder-excalidraw](https://github.com/excalidraw/gatsby-embedder-excalidraw).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
A plugin for Gatsby where you can very easily insert Excalidraw links and it will convert it to SVG during build time. We are actually using it in this post for our charts. Implemented by [trevorblades](https://github.com/trevorblades) & [j-f1](https://github.com/j-f1) and you can find it under [@excalidraw/gatsby-embedder-excalidraw](https://github.com/excalidraw/gatsby-embedder-excalidraw).
```

> ### 📦 NPM package

Author: ```suggestion
### 📦 npm package
```

One of the last things we've introduced this year was the completely rewritten npm package, available at [`@excalidraw/excalidraw`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@excalidraw/excalidraw). Long time in the making (thanks to [@aakansha1216](https://twitter.com/aakansha1216) for most of the work), this package allows you to easily embed Excalidraw as a React component into your apps.

> 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion

### 📱 Mobile mode/responsive design

Touch support and mobile-optimized layout [were](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/787) [first](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/788) [added](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/790) by [j-f1](https://github.com/j-f1). This includes the creation of a toolbar for mobile devices that displays relevant controls while still leaving most of the screen free for viewing the drawing.
```

### 💾 File system integration and file handling

In Excalidraw, we use the [browser-nativefs](https://github.com/GoogleChromeLabs/browser-nativefs) library to integrate with the file system of the operating system. This allows us to support a true open→edit→save workflow with proper over-saving and save-as on supporting browsers, and a fallback to downloading files and file uploads on other browsers. Read more about this feature in [tomayac](https://github.com/tomayac)'s [article](/browser-nativefs/). We also have [experimental support](https://web.dev/file-handling/#demo) for file type association, so that when you double-click an `.excalidraw` file in your file explorer, the Excalidraw PWA opens.

### ⚙️ Gatsby plugin

A plugin for Gatsby where you can very easily insert Excalidraw links and it will convert it to SVG during build time. We are actually using it in this post for our charts. Implemented by [trevorblades](https://github.com/trevorblades) and you can find it under [@excalidraw/gatsby-embedder-excalidraw](https://github.com/excalidraw/gatsby-embedder-excalidraw).

### 📦 NPM package

> One of the last things we've introduced this year was the completely rewritten npm package, available at [`@excalidraw/excalidraw`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@excalidraw/excalidraw). Long time in the making (thanks to [@aakansha1216](https://twitter.com/aakansha1216) for most of the work), this package allows you to easily embed Excalidraw as a React component into your apps. We're nearing a 1.0.0 release, and will continue to actively develop it alongside our web app, so be sure to check it out and report any issues or requests to our [GitHub issue tracker](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/issues).
> 
> (As you may have noticed, the package is under [`@excalidraw`](https://www.npmjs.com/search?q=%40excalidraw) namespace under which we plan to also publish related packages. One of them is [`@excalidraw/utils`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@excalidraw/utils).)

Author: ```suggestion
One of the last things we've introduced this year was the completely rewritten npm package, available at [`@excalidraw/excalidraw`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@excalidraw/excalidraw). Long time in the making (thanks to [@aakansha1216](https://twitter.com/aakansha1216) for most of the work), this package allows you to easily embed Excalidraw as a React component into your apps.
```

@dwelle I think we had too much info for this feature..

---
title: One Year of Excalidraw
date: 2020-12-25
author: Excalidraw Team
link: https://github.com/orgs/excalidraw/people
---

> It's been kind of a different year, but it was the first year and pretty amazing for [Excalidraw](https://excalidraw.com).

<!-- end -->

> Excalidraw started as a way to procrastinate on January 1st of 2020 and ended up being a fully fledged product only one year later! It unfortunately became a core part of many people's workflows due to the pandemic. In this post, we'll go over the most important features that made Excalidraw what it is.

Reviewer 2: > It unfortunately became a core part of many people's workflows due to the pandemic.

I understand the sentiment, but when you say "something unfortunately became your workflow", it generally means the workflow is unfortunate, not the cause.

> Bla bla bla

## Let's start with some numbers

It's been a nice and steady growth, given that our only marketing is Twitter, and of course all the love that we are receiving over there. We are reaching around **60K vistis** per month and the grand total of the visits in our first year is well over **500K**!

### Visists

![Weekly visists](ga-users.png)

### Scenes

> We are storing all the scenes in our backend with [end to end encryption](/end-to-end-encryption/) (which means we don't have access to the actual drawings since they are all encrypted) and the grand total number of the scenes is almost **50K**!

Reviewer 6: This looks like the same graph as the visits one. Probably not worth to duplicate it.

### ⚙️ Gatsby plugin

A plugin for Gatsby where you can very easily insert Excalidraw links and it will convert it to SVG during build time. We are actually using it in this post for our charts. Implemented by [trevorblades](https://github.com/trevorblades) & [j-f1](https://github.com/j-f1), and you can find it under [@excalidraw/gatsby-embedder-excalidraw](https://github.com/excalidraw/gatsby-embedder-excalidraw).

### 📦 npm package

One of the last things we've introduced this year was the completely rewritten npm package, available at [`@excalidraw/excalidraw`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@excalidraw/excalidraw). Long time in the making (thanks to [@aakansha1216](https://twitter.com/aakansha1216) for most of the work), this package allows you to easily embed Excalidraw as a React component into your apps.

> ### 📱 Mobile mode/responsive design

Author: ```suggestion
### 📱 Mobile first
```

/cc @j-f1

---
title: One Year of Excalidraw
date: 2020-12-25
author: Excalidraw Team
link: https://github.com/orgs/excalidraw/people
image: og.png
---

> It's been kind of a different year, but it was the first year and pretty amazing for [Excalidraw](https://excalidraw.com).

<!-- end -->

> Excalidraw started as a way to procrastinate on January 1st, 2020 and ended up being a fully fledged product only one year later! It unfortunately became a core part of many people's workflows due to the pandemic. In this post, we'll go over the most important features that made Excalidraw what it is.

Author: ```suggestion
Excalidraw started as a way to procrastinate on January 1st, 2020 and ended up being a fully fledged product only one year later! It ultimately became a core part of many people's workflows due to the pandemic. In this post, we'll go over the most important features that made Excalidraw what it is.
```

Reviewer 2: I went through several iterations, but nothing sounded right. I think we should just drop the sentence altogether as it doesn't really stand on its own, nor fit in the context of the paragraph, and puts the pandemic in the spotlight which is never good.

Damn, we're spending a lot of time on this one sentence :sweat_smile: 

(Come for the pandemic, stay for the product!)

I think we should start with the traffic Excalidraw received. We ended the year at **20k weekly active users** which is pretty incredible for a project that was started only a year ago.

https://excalidraw.com/#json=6443031091740672,amxJZJxlZAlUBLADWIukFg

### Commits

> This success was only made possible thanks to the over [100 contributors](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/graphs/contributors) that helped us ship new features, improvements and fixes right to production.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This success was only made possible thanks to the over [100 contributors](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/graphs/contributors) that helped us ship new features, improvements, and fixes right to production.
```
oxford comma (for consistency)

https://excalidraw.com/#json=5035223658004480,t4Y53hm-6O1PgeUVwG_GMQ

## Tech stack

> Excalidraw is fully open source, but it also stands on the shoulders of many other projects. We couldn't do it without [Rough.js](https://github.com/rough-stuff/rough), the library that gives Excalidraw its unique look, and [React](https://github.com/facebook/react), of course. [TypeScript](https://github.com/microsoft/TypeScript) is also essential to tame the complexity of our codebase, giving a helping to hand to new contributors (and old ones alike). Our full list of [dependencies](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/network/dependencies) is listed on GitHub.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Excalidraw is fully open source, but it also stands on the shoulders of many other projects. We couldn't do it without [Rough.js](https://github.com/rough-stuff/rough), the library that gives Excalidraw its unique look, and [React](https://github.com/facebook/react), of course. [TypeScript](https://github.com/microsoft/TypeScript) is also essential to tame the complexity of our codebase, giving a helping hand to new contributors (and old ones alike). Our full list of [dependencies](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/network/dependencies) is listed on GitHub.
```

> In addition, Excalidraw was made possible thanks to awesome services such as [Vercel](https://vercel.com/) for hosting and pull request previews, [Crowdin](https://crowdin.com/project/excalidraw) for managing dozens of translation, [Code Sandbox](https://codesandbox.io/) to get started hacking on the project, [Sentry](https://sentry.io/) for error reporting, and [Dependabot](https://github.blog/2020-06-01-keep-all-your-packages-up-to-date-with-dependabot/) to keep our dependencies up to date.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition, Excalidraw was made possible thanks to awesome services such as [Vercel](https://vercel.com/) for hosting and pull request previews, [Crowdin](https://crowdin.com/project/excalidraw) for managing dozens of translations, [CodeSandbox](https://codesandbox.io/) for easy hacking on the project, [Sentry](https://sentry.io/) for error reporting, and [Dependabot](https://github.blog/2020-06-01-keep-all-your-packages-up-to-date-with-dependabot/) to keep our dependencies up to date.
```

## Some of our coolest features

### 🤝 Collaboration

> When the lockdown started, companies all around the world struggled to adapt to remote work. [idlewinn](https://github.com/idlewinn) and [petehunt](https://github.com/petehunt) [implemented live collaboration](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/879) in Excalidraw to enable it to be used for interviews, brainstorms, presentations, and more. If you're curious, we [explained the inner workings in a blog post](/building-excalidraw-p2p-collaboration-feature/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the lockdown started, companies all around the world struggled to adapt to remote work. [idlewinn](https://github.com/idlewinn) and [petehunt](https://github.com/petehunt) [implemented live collaboration](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/879) to enable it to be used for interviews, brainstorming, presentations, and more. If you're curious, we [explained how it works in a blog post](/building-excalidraw-p2p-collaboration-feature/).
```

### 🔒 Your data is encrypted

> Most of Excalidraw use cases involve drawing sensitive data, we architected our system such that our servers never see the content of your drawings through end-to-end encryption. The [backend](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw-json) support for storing data was implemented by [lipis](https://github.com/lipis) and the client [support for encrypting](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/642) the data before submitting was done by [vjeux](https://github.com/vjeux). Read more on how we are doing it in [end to end encryption](/end-to-end-encryption/) article.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Many of Excalidraw use cases involve drawing sensitive data. As such, we architected our system so that our servers never see the content of your drawings, using end-to-end encryption. The [backend](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw-json) support for storing data was implemented by [lipis](https://github.com/lipis), while the [client-side encryption itself](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/642) was added by [vjeux](https://github.com/vjeux). Read  how we are doing it in our article on [end to end encryption](/end-to-end-encryption/).
```

### 🇺🇳 Translations

> It was important for us early on to make sure that Excalidraw was translated into many languages so that it could be used all over the world. The [initial implementation](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/638) of it was done by [fernandoalava](https://github.com/fernandoalava) and the automatic integration with our [Crowdin](https://crowdin.com/project/excalidraw) project was done by [lipis](https://github.com/lipis). UI support for right-to-left languages was [implemented](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1154) by [j-f1](https://github.com/j-f1) and [Ellinor Rapp](https://www.myfonts.com/newsletters/cc/200712.html) added support for glyphs from many more languages in the hand-written font. You can read more [about how we manage translations on the blog](/enabling-translations/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It was important for us early on to make sure that Excalidraw was translated into many languages so that it could be used all over the world. The [initial implementation](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/638) was done by [fernandoalava](https://github.com/fernandoalava), while the automatic integration with our [Crowdin project](https://crowdin.com/project/excalidraw) was set up by [lipis](https://github.com/lipis). Support for right-to-left languages was [implemented](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1154) soon after by [j-f1](https://github.com/j-f1). To top it off, [Ellinor Rapp](https://www.myfonts.com/newsletters/cc/200712.html) designed new glyphs for several non-latin languages and added them to the Virgil hand-written font we're using. You can read more [about how we manage translations on the blog](/enabling-translations/).
```

### 📱 Mobile first

> Touch support and mobile-optimized layout [were](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/787) [first](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/788) [added](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/790) by [j-f1](https://github.com/j-f1). This includes the creation of a toolbar for mobile devices that displays relevant controls while still leaving most of the screen free for viewing the drawing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Touch support and mobile-optimized layout [were](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/787) [first](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/788) [added](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/790) by [j-f1](https://github.com/j-f1). This includes the creation of a toolbar for mobile devices that displays relevant controls while still leaving most of the screen free for the canvas.
```

### 📚 Library

> The library was [first implemented](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1787) by [petehunt](https://github.com/petehunt). Later after adding support for saving the library as a file, we eventually introduced a public directory for libraries. Visit [libraries.excalidraw.com](https://libraries.excalidraw.com) for more.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The library was [first implemented](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1787) by [petehunt](https://github.com/petehunt). Later, after adding support for exporting the library to a file, we eventually introduced a public directory for libraries. Visit [libraries.excalidraw.com](https://libraries.excalidraw.com) for more.
```

### 📊 Excalicharts

While we aim to keep Excalidraw simple to use, sometimes we hide little easter eggs that you need to find out for yourself (or find some hints by following our [Twitter account](https://twitter.com/excalidraw)). For example, you can copy any two-column dataset from a spreadsheet, or comma separated values (CSV) from a text file, and paste them into Excalidraw to quickly produce a chart. The [first implementation](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1723) was done by [petehunt](https://github.com/petehunt) and several [improvements](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/2495) were made by [lipis](https://github.com/lipis).

### ✍️ Free Draw mode

The [free hand draw](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1570) was added by [kbariotis](https://github.com/kbariotis).

> 

Author: ```suggestion

### #️⃣ Grid and Stats

From early on people were asking for more precision in their hand drawn diagrams. We complied by adding the [grid support](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1788) implemented by [dai-chi](https://github.com/dai-shi) and—inspired by _YouTube's stats for nerds_—our own version of [stats](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/2453) implemented by [lipis](https://github.com/lipis). Both features could be found under the context menu from the canvas.

```

### ⚙️ Gatsby plugin

A plugin for Gatsby where you can very easily insert Excalidraw links and it will convert it to SVG during build time. We are actually using it in this post for our charts. Implemented by [trevorblades](https://github.com/trevorblades) & [j-f1](https://github.com/j-f1), and you can find it under [@excalidraw/gatsby-embedder-excalidraw](https://github.com/excalidraw/gatsby-embedder-excalidraw).

### 📦 npm package

One of the last things we've introduced this year was the completely rewritten npm package, available at [`@excalidraw/excalidraw`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@excalidraw/excalidraw). Long time in the making (thanks to [@aakansha1216](https://twitter.com/aakansha1216) for most of the work), this package allows you to easily embed Excalidraw as a React component into your apps.

## Excalidraw in the news

- https://pakstech.com/blog/draw-diagrams/
- https://dev.to/ndsn/why-excalidraw-is-mightier-than-the-pen-and-the-sword-329f
- https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=23525648
- https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=22663435

> - https://web.dev/browser-nativefs/

Author: Modify this list to a paragraph with links

## Get involved

> Excalidraw wouldn't be able to become such a product without all the contributors that gave us not only suggestions and reporting bugs, but actual fixes with hunderds of pull requests. Bla bla bla..

Author: - Good first issue: https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22good+first+issue%22
- Bugs: https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3Abug

> Excalidraw wouldn't be able to become such a product without all the contributors that gave us not only suggestions and reporting bugs, but actual fixes with hunderds of pull requests. Bla bla bla..

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Excalidraw wouldn't have become what it is today without all the wonderful contributions. If you haven't already, you can start today! And remember, it's not just code that makes Excalidraw better. Every bit helps, be it bug reports, translations, suggestions for improvements, or just hanging out on our [Discord chat](https://t.co/jWJMO0IcUu?amp=1) :).
```

> Excalidraw wouldn't have become what it is today without all the wonderful contributions. If you haven't already, you can start today! And remember, it's not just code that makes Excalidraw better. Every bit helps, be it bug reports, translations, suggestions for improvements, or just hanging out on our [Discord chat](https://discord.com/invite/UexuTaE) :).

Author: ```suggestion
Excalidraw wouldn't have become what it is today without all the wonderful contributions. If you haven't already, you can start today! And remember, it's not just code that makes Excalidraw better. Every bit helps, be it bug reports, translations, suggestions for improvements, or just hanging out on our [Discord chat](https://discord.com/invite/UexuTaE).
```

> Excalidraw wouldn't have become what it is today without all the wonderful contributions. If you haven't already, you can start today! And remember, it's not just code that makes Excalidraw better. Every bit helps, be it bug reports, translations, suggestions for improvements, or just hanging out on our [Discord chat](https://t.co/jWJMO0IcUu?amp=1) :).

Author: ```suggestion
Excalidraw wouldn't have become what it is today without all the wonderful contributions. If you haven't already, you can start today! And remember, it's not just code that makes Excalidraw better. Every bit helps, be it bug reports, translations, suggestions for improvements, or just hanging out on our [Discord chat](https://discord.com/invite/UexuTaE) :).
```

## What's next

> We will continue working hard on improving the performance, listening to the feedback, working with real [designers](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/issues/2506) and all that without killing the simplicity that made the Excalidraw what it is.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We will continue working hard on improving the performance, adding features where it makes sense, fixing bugs, working with [designers](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/issues/2506) to make Excalidraw look better, and more. But whatever we do, we'll try our best to ensure we don't lose the simplicity and charm that makes Excalidraw the product you love. :two_hearts: 
```

> We will continue working hard on improving the performance, adding features where it makes sense, fixing bugs, working with [designers](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/issues/2506) to make Excalidraw look better, and more. But whatever we do, we'll try our best to ensure we don't lose the simplicity and charm that makes Excalidraw the product you love. :two_hearts: 

Author: ```suggestion
We will continue working hard on improving the performance, adding features where it makes sense, fixing bugs, working with [designers](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/issues/2506) to make Excalidraw look better, and more. But whatever we do, we'll try our best to ensure we don't lose the simplicity and charm that makes Excalidraw the product you love. 💕 
```

---
title: One Year of Excalidraw

> date: 2020-12-25

Author: 2021-01-02

author: Excalidraw Team
link: https://github.com/orgs/excalidraw/people
image: og.png
---

> It's been kind of a different year, but it was the first year and pretty amazing for [Excalidraw](https://excalidraw.com).

<!-- end -->

Excalidraw started as a way to procrastinate on January 1st, 2020, and ended up being a fully fledged product only one year later! In this post, we'll go over the most important features that made Excalidraw what it is, today.

I think we should start with the traffic Excalidraw received. We ended the year at **20k weekly active users** which is pretty incredible for a project that was started only a year ago.

https://excalidraw.com/#json=6443031091740672,amxJZJxlZAlUBLADWIukFg

> ### Commits

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Commits
```

This success was only made possible thanks to the over [100 contributors](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/graphs/contributors) that helped us ship new features, improvements, and fixes right to production.

> https://excalidraw.com/#json=5035223658004480,t4Y53hm-6O1PgeUVwG_GMQ

Author: ```suggestion
https://excalidraw.com/#json=6586287846850560,ArZZV_fkah9rGHy1Lymq0Q
```

### 🇺🇳 Translations

It was important for us early on to make sure that Excalidraw was translated into many languages so that it could be used all over the world. The [initial implementation](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/638) was done by [fernandoalava](https://github.com/fernandoalava), while the automatic integration with our [Crowdin project](https://crowdin.com/project/excalidraw) was set up by [lipis](https://github.com/lipis). Support for right-to-left languages was [implemented](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1154) soon after by [j-f1](https://github.com/j-f1). To top it off, [Ellinor Rapp](https://www.myfonts.com/newsletters/cc/200712.html) designed new glyphs for several non-latin languages and added them to the Virgil hand-written font we're using. You can read more [about how we manage translations on the blog](/enabling-translations/).

### 📱 Mobile first

> Touch support and mobile-optimized layout [were](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/787) [first](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/788) [added](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/790) by [j-f1](https://github.com/j-f1). This includes the creation of a toolbar for mobile devices that displays relevant controls while still leaving most of the screen free for the canvas.

Reviewer: Can we simplify this a bit ?.
 Not sure if `were,first,added` makes sense as links and if we should add three pr links here.

Reviewer 2: I agree. The PRs don't add much value to readers and will only result in wasted click-throughs.

Author: This post will also target new contributors, so I think these PRs are quite OK as reference..

### 📚 Library

The library was [first implemented](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1787) by [petehunt](https://github.com/petehunt). Later, after adding support for exporting the library to a file, we eventually introduced a public directory for libraries. Visit [libraries.excalidraw.com](https://libraries.excalidraw.com) for more.

### 📊 Excalicharts

While we aim to keep Excalidraw simple to use, sometimes we hide little easter eggs that you need to find out for yourself (or find some hints by following our [Twitter account](https://twitter.com/excalidraw)). For example, you can copy any two-column dataset from a spreadsheet, or comma separated values (CSV) from a text file, and paste them into Excalidraw to quickly produce a chart. The [first implementation](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1723) was done by [petehunt](https://github.com/petehunt) and several [improvements](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/2495) were made by [lipis](https://github.com/lipis).

### ✍️ Free Draw mode

> The [free hand draw](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1570) was added by [kbariotis](https://github.com/kbariotis).

Author: This could use more love :)

Reviewer: How about also adding the [Github issue link ](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/issues/25) here? This was one of the most upvoted features :)

> The [free hand draw](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1570) was added by [kbariotis](https://github.com/kbariotis).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [free hand draw](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1570) was one of the most [upvoted](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/issues/25) features. Thanks to [kbariotis](https://github.com/kbariotis) for implementing this.
```

Reviewer 2: How about `requested` instead of `upvoted`?

### #️⃣ Grid and Stats

> From early on people were asking for more precision in their hand drawn diagrams. We complied by adding the [grid support](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/1788) implemented by [dai-chi](https://github.com/dai-shi) and—inspired by _YouTube's stats for nerds_—our own version of [stats](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/pull/2453) implemented by [lipis](https://github.com/lipis). Both features could be found under the context menu from the canvas.

Author: Added this to the list.. is it worth mentioning? Quite hidden under context menu..

### 💾 File system integration and file handling

In Excalidraw, we use the [browser-nativefs](https://github.com/GoogleChromeLabs/browser-nativefs) library to integrate with the file system of the operating system. This allows us to support a true open→edit→save workflow with proper over-saving and save-as on supported browsers, with a fallback to file uploads and downloads on other browsers. Read more about this feature in [tomayac](https://github.com/tomayac)'s [earlier article](/browser-nativefs/) on this blog. We also have [experimental support](https://web.dev/file-handling/#demo) for file type association, so that when you double-click an `.excalidraw` file in your file explorer, the Excalidraw PWA opens.

### ⚙️ Gatsby plugin

> We also have a plugin for Gatsby that automatically converts links to saved Excalidraw drawings to inline SVG at build time. We are actually using it in this post for our charts. Implemented by [trevorblades](https://github.com/trevorblades) & [j-f1](https://github.com/j-f1), and you can find it under [@excalidraw/gatsby-embedder-excalidraw](https://github.com/excalidraw/gatsby-embedder-excalidraw).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have a plugin for Gatsby that automatically converts links to saved Excalidraw drawings to inline SVG at build time. We are using it in this post for our charts. Implemented by [trevorblades](https://github.com/trevorblades) & [j-f1](https://github.com/j-f1). You can find it under [@excalidraw/gatsby-embedder-excalidraw](https://github.com/excalidraw/gatsby-embedder-excalidraw).
```

Reviewer 2: The `also` is arguable, though I'd keep it. The `actually` is _actually_ significant — without it the sentence is sounds super weird (and part of the sentiment is lost).

Reviewer: Ok let's keep it then

### 📦 npm package

> One of the last things we've introduced this year was a completely rewritten npm package, available at [`@excalidraw/excalidraw`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@excalidraw/excalidraw). A long time in the making (thanks to [@aakansha1216](https://twitter.com/aakansha1216) for most of the work), this package allows you to easily embed Excalidraw as a React component into your apps.

Reviewer: This is our first official package so do we need to mention `rewritten`?

Author: ```suggestion
One of the last things we've introduced this year was a completely new npm package, available at [`@excalidraw/excalidraw`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@excalidraw/excalidraw). A long time in the making (thanks to [@aakansha1216](https://twitter.com/aakansha1216) for most of the work), this package allows you to easily embed Excalidraw as a React component into your apps.
```

- React Europe talk: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fix2-SynPGE
- Used to illustrate an O'Reilly Book: https://www.amazon.com/dp/1492057096
- Another book: https://twitter.com/dchest/status/1264237749642637312
- Few companies also integrated Excalidraw in the product

>   - [HackerRank](https://blog.hackerrank.com/virtual-whiteboarding-for-system-design-interviews/)

Reviewer: Should we replace this with [twitter](https://twitter.com/hackerrank/status/1260674103138082816) link
